Create ArtifactViews using "live" attributes from creating configuration (#25099)
gradle/gradle: subprojects/docs/src/docs/userguide/migration/upgrading_version_8.adoc

=== Potential breaking changes

[[legacy_attribute_snapshotting]]

> ==== ArtifactView and ArtifactCollection variant resolution behavior is more correct
> 
> Prior to Gradle 8.3, `Configuration.getIncoming().artifactView()` and `Configuration.getIncoming().getArtifacts()` captured immutable copies of the `Configuration`'s attributes upon invocation. Consequently, if the `Configuration`'s attributes were changed after these methods were called, the attributes used for resolution by these methods could unexpectedly differ from the final `Configuration` attributes.
> 
> Given that some attributes are lazily added to `Configuration`s during resolution, the behavior of these methods could have differed based on the order that these methods were called.
> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
==== Changed artifact selection behavior with `ArtifactView` and `ArtifactCollection`

The dependency resolution APIs for selecting different artifacts or files (`Configuration.getIncoming().artifactView()` and `Configuration.getIncoming().getArtifacts()`) captured immutable copies of the underlying `Configuration`'s attributes. If the `Configuration`'s attributes were changed after these methods were called, the artifacts selected by these methods could be unexpected or fail to be resolved.
```

Consider the following scenario where `producer` is a sibling `java-library` project to the build below:

```groovy
    plugins {
        id 'java-library'
    }

    dependencies {
        api project(':producer')
    }

    def incomingFiles = configurations.compileClasspath.incoming.files
    def artifactViewFiles = configurations.compileClasspath.incoming.artifactView { }.files

    println 'Incoming Files:'
    incomingFiles.each { println 'Name: ' + it.name }

    println 'Artifact View Files:'
    artifactViewFiles.each { println 'Name: ' + it.name }

    assert incomingFiles*.name == artifactViewFiles*.name // FAILS!
```

Running `gradle help` shows the following logger output that demonstrates the problem:

```
Incoming Files:
Name: main
Artifact View Files:
Name: producer.jar

> ```

Reviewer: Like above, we shouldn't be resolving configurations at configuration time or suggesting that people use `gradle help`.   Can we simplify this example to not use java-library and show an example of where this didn't work before and is now fixed?

=== Potential breaking changes

==== ArtifactView and ArtifactCollection variant resolution behavior is more correct

> In previous versions of Gradle, the attributes used for variant resolution by `ArtifactView` and `ArtifactCollection` began as point-in-time copies of the attributes present on the `Configuration` instance used to create them.
> 
> This meant the attributes used for resolution by those types could unexpectedly differ when the attributes on the `Configuration` changed after an `ArtifactView` or `ArtifactCollection` was created.
> Some default attributes are lazily and automatically added to `Configuration` instances by core Java plugins, so could lead to unexpected behavior.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Prior to Gradle 8.3, `Configuration.getIncoming().artifactView()` and `Configuration.getIncoming().getArtifacts()` captured immutable copies of the `Configuration`'s attributes upon invocation. Consequently, if the `Configuration`'s attributes were changed after these methods were called, the attributes used for resolution by these methods could unexpectedly differ from the final `Configuration` attributes.  

Given that some attributes are lazily added to `Configuration`s during resolution, the behavior of these methods could have differed based on the order that these methods were called. 
```

Consider the following scenario where `producer` is a sibling `java-library` project to the build below:

```groovy
    plugins {
        id 'java-library'
    }

    dependencies {
        api project(':producer')
    }

    def incomingFiles = configurations.compileClasspath.incoming.files
    def artifactViewFiles = configurations.compileClasspath.incoming.artifactView { }.files

>     logger.warn 'Incoming Files:'
>     incomingFiles.each { logger.warn 'Name: ' + it.name }
> 
>     logger.warn 'Artifact View Files:'
>     artifactViewFiles.each { logger.warn 'Name: ' + it.name }

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    println 'Incoming Files:'
    incomingFiles.each { println 'Name: ' + it.name }

    println 'Artifact View Files:'
    artifactViewFiles.each { println 'Name: ' + it.name }
```

I think in most places we traditionally use println instead of logger.warn. Any objection to changing this for the sake of consistency? Applies to the tests as well.

Author: No objection, I'll update it.

Reviewer 2: This looks like it was not updated here?

```

Running `gradle help` shows the following logger output that demonstrates the problem:

```
Incoming Files:
Name: main
Artifact View Files:
Name: producer.jar
```

This `ArtifactView` selects a variant without the benefit of the `org.gradle.libraryelements=classes` attribute, which was added the `compileClasspath` configuration lazily, after the `ArtifactView` was created.
Since the attribute is never added to the `ArtifactView`'s attributes, the `ArtifactView` selects the primary `jar` variant instead of the `classes` variant.

The above scenario demonstrates the previous attribute snapshotting behavior, where the assertion would fail.
With the new behavior, the attribute collection used by `ArtifactView` is "live" and sees the modifications to the configuration's attributes; because of this the assertion now passes.

The new behavior correctly implements the expectation that an `ArtifactView` without any further customization will return the same files as the configuration that created it.
A new system setting `org.gradle.configuration.use-legacy-attribute-snapshot-behavior` has been provided to temporarily restore the legacy behavior for those who need time to migrate.

> This setting should be considered immediately deprecated and will be removed in Gradle 9.0.

Author: Asking now.

> This setting should be considered immediately deprecated and will be removed in Gradle 9.0.

Reviewer 2: Lets leave this one unresolved until we get a resolution from the support team

> This setting should be considered immediately deprecated and will be removed in Gradle 9.0.

Reviewer: Like I said above, we shouldn't have magic system properties like this.  We either need to basically support both behaviors or only support one or the other.
